Consolidate time series downsampling docs (#2274)
elastic/docs-content: manage-data/data-store/data-streams/downsampling-concepts.md

:::{image} /manage-data/images/elasticsearch-reference-time-series-metric-anatomy.png
:alt: time series metric anatomy
:::

For the most current data, the metrics series typically has a low sampling time interval, to optimize for queries that require a high data resolution.

:::{image} /manage-data/images/elasticsearch-reference-time-series-original.png
:alt: time series original
:title: Original metrics series
:::

Downsampling reduces the footprint of older, less frequently accessed data by replacing the original time series with a data stream of a higher sampling interval, plus statistical representations of the data. For example, if the original metrics samples were taken every 10 seconds, you might choose to reduce the sample granularity to hourly as the data ages. Or you might choose to reduce the granularity of `cold` archival data to monthly or less.

:::{image} /manage-data/images/elasticsearch-reference-time-series-downsampled.png
:alt: time series downsampled
:title: Downsampled metrics series
:::

## How downsampling works [downsample-api-process]

The downsampling operation traverses the source TSDS index and performs the following steps:

> 1. Creates a new document for each value of the `_tsid` field and each `@timestamp` value, rounded to the `fixed_interval` defined in the downsampling configuration.

Reviewer: I know that this was copied from the previous concepts page, but I still find it very confusing.

What we want to say here is that we gather all the documents that have the same dimension values (that's what the tsid is in reality) and timestamps inside a specific interval (we call this a bucket, which is also referenced later out of the blue). And we then create a single document for all of them with the same values for the dimensions (tsid) and as its timestamp the start of the interval

e.g. I have:
```
{time="8:15:21", location="paris", quartier ="belleville", temperature=22.1, wind=1.1}
{time="8:15:23", location="paris", quartier ="belleville", temperature=22.5, wind=1.2}
{time="8:15:24", location="paris", quartier ="belleville", temperature=21.9, wind=1.1}
{time="8:15:27", location="paris", quartier ="belleville", temperature=22.2, wind=1.3}
```

If we downsample per 10 seconds, those 4 documents would be summarized to one:
```
{time="8:15:20", location="paris", quartier ="belleville", STATS for the temp and wind on those 4 docs}
```

So, I think that this could be better, but be my guest to change it further
```suggestion
1. Creates a new document for each group of documents with the same time series dimension values (same `_tsid` value) and downsampling bucket (timestamps that fall in a specific interval)
```

We could even skip the parentheses at this level

2. For each new document, copies all [time series dimensions](time-series-data-stream-tsds.md#time-series-dimension) from the source index to the target index. Dimensions in a TSDS are constant, so this step happens only once per bucket.
3. For each [time series metric](time-series-data-stream-tsds.md#time-series-metric) field, computes aggregations for all documents in the bucket.

    * `gauge` field type:
        * `min`, `max`, `sum`, and `value_count` are stored 
        * `value_count` is stored as type `aggregate_metric_double`
    * `counter` field type:
        * `last_value` is stored.

4. For all other fields, copies the most recent value to the target index.
5. Deletes the original index and replaces it with the downsampled index. Within a data stream, only one index can exist for a time period.

> The new, downsampled index is created on the data tier of the original index and inherits the original settings, like number of shards and replicas.

Reviewer: Makes sense Mary, let's keep it as is then!

3. **Labels:** Label fields (fields that are neither dimensions nor metrics) are created in the target downsampled index with the same mapping as in the source index.

% TODO ^^ make this more concise / a table?

## Querying downsampled indices [querying-downsampled-indices]

To query a downsampled index, use the [`_search`](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-search) and [`_async_search`](https://www.elastic.co/docs/api/doc/elasticsearch/operation/operation-async-search-submit) endpoints. 

* You can query multiple raw data and downsampled indices in a single request, and a single request can include downsampled indices with multiple downsampling intervals (for example, `15m`, `1h`, `1d`).
* When you run queries in {{kib}} and through Elastic solutions, a standard response is returned, with no indication that some of the queried indices are downsampled.
* [Date histogram aggregations](elasticsearch://reference/aggregations/search-aggregations-bucket-datehistogram-aggregation.md) support `fixed_intervals` only (not calendar-aware intervals).

> * Time-based histogram aggregations use a uniform bucket size, without regard to the downsampling time interval specified in the request.

Reviewer: I agree, the new dedicated page for querying downsampled data looks much simple now. Maybe just add a note to link to the TS command once it is ready (as an update included in https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/pull/134373)?
